
A little 100-GB library as an introduction to troves


This shoebox contains a library: a Raspberry Pi, running linux, apache, and spot, that creates a wifi network that serves a set of web pages that is a library containing 54324 books in the epub format. 


1) Description

I have coined the term "Trove" to describe a self-contained, self-organized, self-offering, impossibly large collection of material; I'm here to speak about this idea. 

For purely political reasons, I impose further conditions on the term:
1) A collection of thousands of digital works,
2) Stored in physically-present media, without any kind of mechanism for controlling access.
3) The works are catalogued;
    a) the catalog is searchable.
    b) The catalog's organization is documented in the trove.
    c) The catalog's format is human-readable.
4) Troves use only publically-documented, public-domain formats
5) Troves assist with their own duplication


Here are 3 Example Troves:

Project Gutenberg is a 40-year-old effort to put public-domain works online. Their collection contains 54000 books. They have three mirror sites and are run by a single organization in Utah. They seem robust; they've
been online for 40 years. China could destroy them tomorrow. 

Here is a BeagleBone, running Debian and Apache, serving up a web interface that makes the entire 
54,000-work collection available. All of the data in the trove is on a 128-GB micro-sd card. 

The card also holds a clone of the githup repo containing the software that I used to make the web pages and books. 
If you wish to have a copy of this object, bring a 128GB micro-sd card to one of my kiosks in the exhibition. 

Here is a second Pi2, serving Wikipedia. 

Here is a third Pi, serving up the Petrucci Music Library:140,000 pieces of sheet music. 




2) Motivation:

The internet contains a lot of data, today. Five years ago, Google Books gave free access
to millions of books. Today, the number is not in the millions, thanks to the continuous
efforts of a few corporations. 

Decades-old projects like Google Books, containing thousands or millions of works, abound. 
Examples of formerly deep collections that are destroyed or offline are also beginning to accumulate.
Wikipedia was taken offline in August by an anonymous DDoS attack. In September, a single Russian judge,
to prevent dissemination of a single work, made the entire internet archive inaccessible for the entire country. 
Yahoo, after byuing tumblr, summarily deleted thousands of accounts, without warning or apology, 
for the sake of conforming to sexual mores that were not discussed. When Microsoft took its e-book license server offline, 
every book purchased through that system became unreadable. Apps "purchased" from Apple's App Store that no longer function
outnumber those that do. Corporate emphasis on cloud computing has the dual effect of making information more easily available, and moving 
ownership of that data away from the user. Patently false, automated copyright claims against 
YouTube content routinely remove thousands of works. 

There are multiple mechanisms are work here, but the result is the same: corporate and government interests
remove enormous amounts of data from the public sphere, and there is no redress. 
The legal status of the data is irrelevent in the face of the power we grant to the titans of the internet.

We could, perhaps, be just past the peak of information availability. Network neutrality law has 
fallen to blatant corruption. Digital rights management has been grafted onto basic web protocols. 
Operating systems are increasingly interested in "verifying" that user content is from an approved source.
All online content views are, permanently, exhaustively, catalogued, but no legal action is taken, 
in most places, that we know of, at the moment.

To me, the internet looks like something provisional, an interim object, that will turn out, in the long run, 
to mainly be about universal surveillance and streaming sports events.

But the real reason to have a trove is simple: you can!

Why depend on the whims of the mighty for access to your heritage?


3 construction
  a hardware

Only very basic hardware is required for a trove. 

  b data acquisition

Most large data collections guard against web crawlers. 
Ownership issues are a thing


  c metadata

Metadata is of such central importance that I start by looking for metadata, not collections. 

Building metadata for a collection is not an option. You must be able to distinguish all your data algorithmically, content that is not distinguishable cannot be found except by manual search. Manual search of a collection of even two thousand things is futile. 

  d interface

I recommend a web interface, because it is a widely-used standard, and because web pages are easy to generate from metadata. I use Python. The scripts are all at github/bernardo5

  e duplication/distribution

Torrenting works for gigabytes. This is terabytes. Sneakernet works best. 

  f self-documentation



4 future work
  a all books
  b trove of education
  c all sheet music
  d wikipedia / art-history / architecture


5 hoped-for impacts
  Get the rest. 

  The canon is mostly the works that are made easily available
  ease of access has improved; this is the final push: total access

  Reconsideration of what constitutes a classic? Though even a 50k selection
  is only 5% of what is presumably available: still quite culled.
  Though much of the 95% could easily be government records. 

  Offlining of content that does not change; universal ownership of it

  Establishment of the creative commons as knowable and legally defensible. 

  Institutions that will not help
    Public libraries: 
        Libraries serve the public; public demand is driven by marketing. 
        No matter how simple your interface is, it is a complication of their existing system, and will defeat most library patrons. 
    School libraries 
    Universities
        will mirror
    

At the core of the Trove concept is a distintion between data that does not need to change, and data that does. 
The idea of a canon is old, and subject to constant challenge, because the canon has always implicitly been 
the 200 or so works that can be presented in an educational career. The goal of a book trove builder would be to 
simply have all the books. 

This is possible: the LOC estimates that 80% of books out of copyright have been digitized. They estimate 
that five million books in english were published before 1920. 

If you allow 200k for each, plan on needing 3 terabytes to store it, which today costs $70 and is smaller than a pack of cards. Manipulation of millions of records is no computational barrier. 
There are no hardware barriers to such a collection.


Once a collection has more than a few dozen items, organization becomes important. Organizing a hundred items
is trivial. Organizing a million items requires a team of librarians. 

Librarians deal in metadata. Every public library is a trove, except that libraries are difficult to duplicate. 


Reflections on the definition
    The resursive nature of standards, and violations of the ideals
    The presnce of web browsers and their issues: use brave.
Ugh writing. 

Notes on Catalogs

I am not claiming that troves are a solution to the issues around canon priviledge, but it's true that 
one of the privileges of being in the canon is being easy to find, and troves obliterate that. 





One can easily envision a university trove, containing video instruction for 20 years of education, on every topic currently on offer:
2 hours / lecture, 30 lectures a class, 12 classes a year for 20 years is 20*12*30*2 = 14400 hours of video-- 7 terabytes. That's feasible. 
Universities offer many more clases than that, so.. multiply it by three-- or twenty! The economics are not greatly impacted.
Video lectures are not as good as student-teacher interaction, when that interaction is good, 
but I got most of my math education from men who would have done less damage as recordings. 



making the records

1) read in all the card recs
2) read in the LOC classifications-- there are ~350
3) for each classification
    make two files, author and title
    make a title list
    for each card
    	if it's in the class, add the book title to the list
    sort the titles by secondary subject 
    	then by author, write
    	then by title, write

there will be only one sorting, but books can be duplicated. 
do the books with 2 lc and 2 lcch only have two entries? how to match up? 
what about additional subjects? 
need to look at more records


The library is organized by subject, mostly. 
each LOC heading will have ~1000 books -- 33books/shelf, 120/case, 8 cases
sorting these by subject name then title, stop thinking about it!

4) make pages for each classification
    cut books into shelves
    cut shelves into cases
    shelf records 
    	LOC letters + LCCH 
    arrange shelves in rooms: one room per LOC
    arrange rooms in a circle? something. 
    processing sketch? 

First Floor- Humanities
A References & Periodicals
B Philosophy
C General History
note gap! branch browse option? 
G Geography
H Social Sciences
J Legislative and Executive Papers  
K Law
L Education  

Second Floor: Regional Histories -- a world map and a timeline
D Histories, Eastern Hemisphere 
E   Histories, Western Hemisphere
E151 United States History
E300 -Revolution to Civil War 
E337.5 -Early Nineteenth century
E415 -Middle nineteenth century
E456 -Civil War, 1861-1865 
E660 -Late Nineteenth century
E740 -Early Twentieth Century 
E838 -Late Twentieth Century 
F Local Histories
F1 -United States local history 
F1001 Canada 
F1201 Latin America 

Basement: Music
M Music  -- by date? genre? format.
N Visual arts -- by provenance, then date.

Third Floor: Fiction
P Philology & Linguistics  
Plays? Genres? 
Sci-fi, historical, horror, humourousqe jocularism
Sort by date? Can you? 
Children's section

Fourth: Science
Q Science 
R Medicine 
S Agriculture 
T Technology
U Military Science 
V Naval Science 
Z Writing & Books
99 Unclassified


Okay, enough delusions of grandeur. 
How about a set of poetry books?
